Intellectual Formation 

It was during his years at Turin University that Gramsci first 
came into serious contact with the intellectual world of his time. 
The deficiencies of liberal Italy had created a certain vogue for 
socialist ideas even in bourgeois circles, and many of the professors 
at the University had links with the socialist movement. Foremost 
among these were Umberto Cosmo, a literary historian and Dante 
scholar, with whom Gramsci became friends and whom he subse- 
quently was to criticise for his bourgeois style of attachment to 
the workers' movement, and Annibale Pastore, whose lectures on 
Marxism Gramsci attended. Here he was introduced to the par- 
ticular brand of Hegelianised "philosophy of praxis" to which he 
remained in an ambiguous critical relationship right to the end of 
his working life. 

The term "philosophy of praxis", best known today in connec- 
tion with Gramsci's Prison Notebooks, in which it is used partly 
for ite own sake and partly as a euphemism to deceive the censor, 
was introduced into Italy by Antonio Labriola, the only Italian 
theoretical Marxist of any consequence before the first world war. 
Labriola, who died in 1904, was a philosopher and historian who 
had come round to Marxism and to participation in the socialist 
movement fairly late in life, bringing with him distinct traces of a 
Hegelian intellectual formation. He saw the essence of Marxism 
in the unique nexus it established between theoretical and practical 
activity, and maintained the unity of philosophy and history; he 
distinguished himself from the Hegelian school mainly by his insis- 
tence on the primacy of concrete relations over consciousness. 
Labriola's ideas, particularly on the interpretation of history, were 
extremely influential, but mainly in intellectual circles and often 
in a distorted form which accentuated their latent idealism at the 
expense of their materialist base. The phrase "philosophy of 
praxis" in particular entered into the parlance of a specifically 
anti-materialist tendency of which the major exponents were 
Rodolfo Mondolfo and, in a marginal way, Giovanni Gentile. 

Gentile's role in the development of Italian Marxism was limited 
to one thing: his translation, the first into Italian, of Marx's Theses 
on Feuerbach, which he interpreted idealistically as referring to the 



xxii 



GRAMSGi: PRISON NOTEBOOKS 



process of cognition rather than to the real world and man's relation 
to it. Gentile's flirtation with Marxism was brief and superficial. 
His theory of praxis soon degenerated into a philosophy of the 
"pure act", of voluntarist and proto-fascist inspiration. He later 
became a major ideologue of fascism and was executed by the 
partisans during the resistance. 

Mondolfo was a far more serious figure, and after Labriola's 
death the leading philosopher of Italian socialism. His main con- 
tribution to Marxism lay in his attempt to drive a wedge between 
the "philosophical" Marx and the more empirical Engels. Mondolfo 
and his school were also responsible to a large extent for the idealistic 
interpretation of Labriola. The use, common to Labriola, Mondolfo 
and Gramsci of the same phrase "philosophy of praxis" has led 
some commentators to posit a common idealist matrix for the 
three thinkers. This is a view that must be treated with caution. 
In one feature Gramsci's mature thought is in accord with 
Mondolfo's ideas and that is in its constant underplaying of the 
materialist element in Marx's work, which, in Gramsci at least, is 
replaced with a stress on "immanentism" and the elimination of 
metaphysics. On the whole, however, Gramsci shows himself 
critical of Mondolfo and concerned to reassert the substantial 
Marxism of Labriola against both those Marxists who had criticised 
him for idealism and the idealists who had tried to claim him for 
their own. That Mondolfo's approach to Marxism entered into his 
own culture at this early period is certain, but as Gramsci himself 
was to point out, in relation to Marx, there is a distinction to be 
made between the personal philosophical culture of an author — 
what he has read and absorbed and maybe rejected at various 
periods of his life — and his own original philosophy. 

A far more important philosophical and cultural influence 
imparted to Gramsci in his early years was that of Benedetto 
Croce. Croce had been a pupil of Labriola and for a short period, 
between 1895 and 1900, professed himself a Marxist. He soon 
defected, declaring Marxism to be useful only as a "simple canon of 
historical enquiry and research" and pronouncing, with charac- 
teristic arrogance, "the death of theoretical Marxism in Italy" 
coincidental with his own defection. Croce's influence on the whole 
of Italian culture right up to the present time cannot be over- 
estimated. Despite his abandonment of Marxism many of his ideas 
continued to strike an echoing chord among young intellectuals of 
the left in the pre-fascist period: notably his secularism and his 
opposition to the previously dominant ideology of positivism. 



INTRODUCTION 



xxiii 



Politically his role was always ambiguous. His calls for ethical 
renewal had dangerous overtones, as his support for Mussolini in 
the early twenties was to show. But his continued association with 
the French theorist of syndicalism, Georges Sorel, helped to sustain 
the illusion that his could be a philosophy for the Left. 

Looking back on his student days, Gramsci was to describe 
himself self-critically as having been, in his youth, "tendentially 
Crocean", and many of his early articles have a distinct Crocean 
ring about them. This personal, though culturally imparted, 
Crocean influence on Gramsci himself must be carefully dis- 
tinguished from the attitude which emerges from the Quaderni, 
where Croce is considered more objectively as a philosopher and 
as a dominant figure in contemporary culture. Much of Gramsci's 
philosophical notebooks is devoted to a rigorous critique of Crocean 
philosophy in its relation to Marxism. In his prison writings he 
refers constantly to the need to combat Croceanism, both as a 
diffuse ideology and as a specific philosophical system, sometimes 
casting Croce in the role of a Diihring, to be polemically destroyed, 
but more often seeing him as comparable to Hegel as a thinker 
whose work could be profited from in the struggle to renew Marxist 
thought and liberate it from positivistic accretions. 

The substance of Gramsci's mature critique of Croce's philo- 
sophy relates to the latter's reduction of historical movement from 
a struggle of opposites to a merely conceptual dialectic, the "dialectic 
of distincts". While, Gramsci contended, such a schema might have 
its place in the philosophy of a society in which real conflicts had 
been eliminated and where the unity of knowledge and being, 
impossible in a class society, had finally been achieved, it was 
unable to offer an account of the actual concrete character of a 
history fundamentally determined by the class struggle. This 
abstraction of real history into an ethereal realm of distinct concepts 
went hand in hand, in Crocean philosophy, with a radical denial 
of politics. The distinct "categories" of the Crocean system allow for 
the existence of four sciences, Aesthetics, Economics, Logic and 
Ethics, relating to the pursuit respectively of the Beautiful, the Useful, 
the True and the Good. Politics, in this conception, can only be a 
composite entity, a mere "passion", of no philosophical value. In 
Gramsci's thought, by contrast, politics figures, philosophically, as 
the central human activity, the means by which the single 
consciousness is brought into contact with the social and natural 
world in all its forms. 

The critique to which Gramsci subjects Crocean idealism in the 



XXIV 



GRAMSCi: PRISON NOTEBOOKS 



prison Quaderni is motivated, however, less by an abstract concern 
to expose its intellectual inadequacies than by an awareness of the 
need to destroy the influence which Croceanism, and Croce himself, 
had on all aspects of Italian cultural and even political life. Whereas 
in the period leading up to the first world war much of what Croce 
said and did could be held to have a positive value — his leftish 
sympathies, his revaluation of a "romantic" tradition in Italian 
culture from Vico through De Sanctis up to the present, his opposi- 
tion to contemporary positivism — the rise of fascism and Croce's 
ambiguous attitude to it had turned his role into a pernicious and 
reactionary one. Unlike Gentile, Croce did not play a direct and 
active part in the elaboration of fascist cultural policy and ;ven 
managed to draw intellectual credit from the fact of his abstention 
from public life after 1926. But the fact remains that he did support 
the regime at the outset and that the theoretical character of his 
later opposition was of a singularly insipid and depoliticising kind, 
whose effect on the intellectual strata subject to Crocean influence 
was at best to inspire a certain withdrawal from fascist vulgarity, 
but which more often promoted a habit of "justificationism" 
with regard to the regime far more extensive than any provoked 
by Hegel's supposed glorification of the Prussian monarchy. 

The war and fascism provided a brutal litmus test for many 
progressive and avant-garde intellectuals and artists beside Croce. 
Among those who supported or were at least complicit with the 
regime were D'Annunzio, Pirandello, Marinetti the futurist poet, 
together with most of his acolytes, the meridionalist Prezzolini, 
former editor of La Voce, Mario Missiroli and countless others. 
Many of these had been important figures in Gramsci's cultural 
formation, at a time when they had held advanced positions in the 
world of Italian culture and before Gramsci's own Marxism had 
matured and taken its definitive form. Not only Gramsci but the 
whole Ordine Nuovo group of Communists in Turin had been 
influenced by the cultural ferment of the prewar years and it is a 
sign of the complexity and confusion of the Italian situation that 
a group such as the Futurists, for example, whose Russian equiva- 
lents, led by Mayakovsky, had played a leading role in the formation 
of the Soviet avant-garde, should in Italy have degenerated into the 
barrel-organs of fascism. Be that as it may the whole question of 
the Italian intellectuals, their provincialism, their cosmopolitanism, 
their role in the power structure of Church and State, particularly 
in the South, was to become a major subject of Gramsci's reflection 
in prison. His critique is never sectarian. It starts from a realistic 



INTRODUCTION 



XXV 



assessment of the objective weakness of the Italian intelligentsia 
with a view to recuperating those ideas and those forces which 
could contribute to the formation of a "national -popular" con- 
sciousness in association with the rising power of the proletariat. 
Even Crocean idealism, despite its evident anti-popular bias, is not 
totally dismissed, and those features of it which had positively 
impressed Gramsci in his youth are brought out and used, even, 
as an aid to the criticism of orthodox Marxism itself. 

Socialist Politics in Turin 

When Gramsci arrived in Turin, the city was the red capital of 
Italy — Gramsci was to call it Italy's Petrograd — home of its most 
advanced industry and above all of fiat. By the end of the war, 
fiat was to be the biggest producer of tractors in Europe; its 
workers were to increase from 4,000 in 191 3 to 20,000 in 191 8; by 
1915, it was exporting armoured cars and aeroplanes to the Entente 
countries in great quantities. Turin's population rose from some 
400,000 in 1 91 1 (20 per cent of them industrial workers) to over 
500,000 in 1 91 8 (30 per cent of them industrial workers) — and this 
despite the fact that between 5 and 10 per cent of the population 
was in the army and therefore not included in the 19 18 total. Of 
the Turin working class, some 40 per cent was made up of women, 
and these were in the vanguard of all the major proletarian 
upheavals which shook the city between 191 2 and 1920. 

One consequence of the specific character of Turin's capitalism 
was that, unlike the other major industrial cities of the country, it 
was relatively satisfied by the boom which it experienced in 
1 914-15, and hence favoured the policy of neutrality advocated by 
Giolitti. It was above all heavy industry — iron, steel, coal, ship- 
ping — which stood to gain from war. But the cotton and wool 
factories which still represented by far the greater part of Turin's 
industry, and the vehicle industry which was soon destined to 
outstrip these, were both so overwhelmed by orders from the 
belligerent Entente countries that they saw no need for direct 
intervention in the war. They had absorbed whatever unemployed 
labour they could find among the recent immigrants and especially 
among the women of the population, they were short of skilled 
labour and were intent above all on introducing new methods of 
raising productivity — the Taylorism which was to interest both 
Lenin and Gramsci so much — and in maintaining industrial peace 
as far as was possible. 



XXVI 



G RAM SGI : PRISON NOTEBOOKS 



The latter task was a formidable one. The proletariat of Turin 
was the most advanced and combative in Italy. As early as 1904-6, 
it had demonstrated a high degree of solidarity and a readiness 
to take to the streets. Although it suffered a series of massive defeats 
in 1907, which were followed by years which saw the apogee of 
Giolittian "industrial peace" and the rapid growth of a collabora- 
tionist trade-union movement, nevertheless in 19 12 the metal- 
workers (those not organised in unions!) embarked upon a strike 
"to the end". This was defeated, after 75 days of struggle; but the 
metalworkers came out again — this time led by the union, the 
fiom — in the spring of 1913, and after a 93-day strike won a 
considerable victory (pardy as a result of government intervention 
against the employers' dangerous intransigence). These struggles 
were the background to Gramsci's first years in Turin. They won 
him from his youthful Southernism, demonstrating that the workers 
were the real enemy of the Northern industrialists, despite the 
collaborationism of their reformist leaders, and that they were thus 
the potential ally and leader of the peasant masses of the South. 
As war approached, and after its outbreak, the struggles of the 
Turin proletariat became yet more massive, and at the same time 
more political. The key stages in this trajectory were the general 
strike of June 19 14, following the bloody repression of an anti-war 
demonstration at Ancona; the huge anti-war demonstrations and 
general strike of May 19 15; and above all the insurrection of 
August 1 91 7. 
